[THEME MUSIC]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we'll be exploring the
path of the Inca medicine
wheel.
My guest is Dr. Alberto
Villoldo, a psychologist
and medical anthropologist
and author of numerous books,
including "Realms of Healing,"
"Dance of the Four Winds,"
"Island of the Sun," and
"Shaman, Healer, Sage."
Alberto is founder and director
of the Four Winds Society.
Welcome, Alberto.
>> Thank you, Jeff.
It's good to be here.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you again.
Your work is very
intriguing to me
because you've managed
to immerse yourself
in the culture of the
Andean priesthood,
the shamanistic traditions
of Latin America,
particularly of
the Peruvian Andes.
It's a culture that up
until recent decades
was sort of invisible
to the Western world.
>> You know, the Western world
hasn't been looking for these
cultures very much.
They've been intent on
exterminating them because they
are traditions of the
Earth and of the feminine,
and very much in contrast
with the Western traditions ,
which are very much
of the masculine.
Our science is very
reductionistic.
It's not one of networking
and communion with.
And these are the ways
of the feminine Earth.
It's curious.
In the West, we're
the only people
that were ever kicked out
of the garden of Eden.
And these are the
traditions of people
that still live in
the garden, that
still speak with God, that
still talk to the rivers
and to the trees.
So there's always been
a rift between those
who live outside
the garden and those
who still dwell within it.
And after spending a
long time investigating
the mind-body
healing in the West,
I decided to jump over the
fence and spend some time
with the people that
still lived in the garden.
>> You were fortunate enough
to find a teacher who was both
an experienced shaman of the
highest initiation and also
a professor.
>> That's right.
>> And the intriguing
thing is that he claims,
if I understand the story, that
he found you or he brought you
to him.
>> Well, I thought I was
the one who discovered him.
And of course, I
became a mouthpiece,
a contemporary mouthpiece for
a 100,000 year old tradition
of knowledge and power that
is really very relevant today.
It's very contemporary.
It's a tradition of stewardship.
It's the
post-industrial paradigm
that we have been
looking for that it's
right here in the Americas.
>> Now, you use these
words, knowledge and power.
And I think many
of our listeners
may assume that we understand
what knowledge and power are.
But you are using them
in a particular way,
not I think in the way we
normally use those terms.
>> Right.
In the shamanic traditions,
in the medicine traditions,
there is a differentiation
between information
and knowledge.
When I went to the
Amazon and the Andes,
I was finishing my
PhD, and my mentor
would say to me, Alberto,
you have so much information,
but such little knowledge.
And information is
knowing that water is H2O.
Knowledge is being
able to make it rain.
We know how to describe the
nature of illness and disease.
We're excellent at diagnosing.
Knowledge is being able to heal.
And my mentor told
me that you had
to be able to grow corn with it.
You couldn't grow corn with it.
It's wonderful that we can
describe through quantum
physics all these
extraordinary states that
are available to
us, but the shaman
is actually able to do them.
You've got to grow
corn with them.
They have to be practical.
>> Your teacher,
Antonio Morales,
deceived you in
some ways, though.
He didn't even let you
know that he was a master
shaman until you were well
along in your work with him.
>> Well, he was a trickster.
He was a trickster.
He didn't let me know that
he had a PhD until I knew how
to add and I knew the alphabet.
So at that point, I was
ready to truly engage him
in writing poetry.
>> One of the things that he
taught you in the early stages
of your work with him was to see
what you might call a luminous
body, a completely different
form of vision than we are
accustomed to in the West.
>> Well, what he
taught me was a map,
a very ancient map to healing
and transformation that's known
as the medicine wheel that has
four steps to becoming a person
of wisdom.
And the first one
is to heal yourself,
but to heal yourself
really at the source,
not at the level of the symptom
but at the level of the source
of that luminous body, that
luminous envelope that informs
and organizes the physical
body in the same way
that the energy
fields of a magnet
will organize iron filings
on a piece of glass.
We can move the iron filings
around as much as we want,
but until we are able to
shift the architecture
of those fields of
that magnet, we're not
going to have lasting change.
We can remove a cancerous
tumor, but if you
don't erase it
from the blueprint,
it's going to re-manifest.
Whereas if you
erase a blueprint,
the blueprint informs
the physical body
and brings about health.
>> Well, now you're describing
this 100,000-year-old tradition
in terms of the four directions
of the Inca medicine wheel.
I began by talking about
the luminous body, which you
might say it's a phenomenon.
And psychics and shamans
report on phenomenon.
But what you're suggesting
by bringing up this approach
is that a true shaman
in this tradition
is engaging in a very ancient
and holistic path of knowledge.
>> Correct.
>> It's not a question
of knowing a few tricks
or experiencing
a few phenomenon.
It is a question of growing into
a highly evolved and developed
tradition that incorporates--
>> An extraordinarily evolved
tradition that has been
dismissed in the West because
there is no written tradition
in the Americas.
So the assumption was,
there was no writing--
these people are illiterate.
And we know that if you're
literate, you're stupid.
And this, of course,
has not been the case.
This is part of the
systemic extermination
of these traditions.
You know that what drew me
to Peru, aside from the fact
that it was the only
country where there were
indigenous peoples
left in large numbers,
was the fact that there
was still an operating
Office of the Inquisition.
>> Yes, I recall
reading about that.
>> It's still being
run by the Dominicans,
by the same people that burnt
Joan of Arc at the stake.
And it's called the Office for
the Extrications of Idolatries.
The only place in the world.
It's been open for 500 years.
And they still have
a lot of business.
>> Well, it's one of
the reasons, I suppose,
that the shamans in Peru
remained invisible for so long.
>> Correct.
Correct.
It's the same reason that
Christianity survived
by going into the catacombs.
They went underground.
And the medicine traditions
both in North America
and in South America
also became invisible.
But these are the
traditions of the builders
of Machu Picchu, of the
builders of extraordinary cities
in the clouds, of
amazing astronomers,
of mathematicians, and of
a lineage that devolved,
evolved a very carefully crafted
spiritual methodology as rich
as the Tibetan.
>> Well, I have had the
privilege of visiting Peru,
and I was struck when I was
there by a place in Cusco
called the Temple of the Sun.
A cathedral had been built over
it, in effect to cover it up.
>> The Dominican
cathedral, the Dominicans,
the ones who run the
inquisition still.
>> Then, in the 1950s,
an earthquake came,
pretty near destroyed
the cathedral.
But the Inca temple
remained standing.
>> Intact.
Underneath-- and this is the
most important of Inca temples.
And it was the Inca temple that
marked the beginning of time.
From within this temple, all
of the calendar lines emerged.
But it was also the temple
where you could go back
to the beginning
of time and where
you could step outside of time,
outside of the grip of time
itself.
>> This is a key idea,
because in Western theology,
we have this notion of--
at the end of time, there
will be a resurrection.
>> Correct.
>> People will meet their
maker at the end of time.
And the shamans seem
to feel that the end
of time or eternity outside
of time can be experienced.
>> Well, see, the shamanic
methodologies are designed
to do that.
They'll say, of course you can
wait until the end of time.
It's a very long time to wait.
But how about tonight?
What do you say tonight we
recover our original nature
that is free from death, that
is able to taste infinity,
that is able to experience our
healed state that can never
be affected by illness, by
disease, not even by death?
Very powerful
methodologies that I think
are eminently applicable today.
>> And you've been visiting
these cultures now for decades,
for approximately three. four
decades, and I've had many,
many such experiences.
You've written about them
articulately in numerous books.
And I have to say this,
because some of our viewers,
amongst the more
sophisticated viewers,
there may be a
sense of cynicism.
We've heard of Carlos Castaneda
and other people who write
about shamanistic traditions.
And then, later on, we learn
that what they've written
was fictionalized.
And I know that you write
with more integrity than that.
But before you answer, Alberto,
we need to take a short break.
We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're back.
I'm talking with Dr. Alberto
Villoldo about the path
of the Inca medicine wheel.
And as we were saying
before the break,
there is amongst
academics, certainly, and--
>> There's a lot of debate.
>> --the United States,
a lot of distrust.
>> Yes, there is, because
this is an oral tradition,
and it's based on direct
experience and personal
experience.
It's a very poetic tradition
too, which lends itself
to a lot of misinterpretation,
and making very exotic claims,
as you have with some
of the popular writers.
At the same time,
it's a very rich path
that invites the traveler
to experience communion
with the Earth,
with the heavens,
with the forces of
nature directly, and then
draw your own conclusions.
But this is the path of poetry.
It's not the path of
dissection, of seeing
what lies inside the frog,
but how sweetly can it sing.
So it's a wonderful complement
to our Western scientific path.
And I think that we're best
prepared to experience this
through a Western
training so we don't
slip into the grips of
popular superstition.
For example, our popular
superstition in the West
is science, which has become
a theology in the West.
But you find the same concepts
in the shamanic cultures,
because they were very
wise observers of nature.
And they noticed
that, for example,
the laws of physics, the same
ways that we've identified,
have been identified by these
extraordinary architects
and medicine people.
But they described
them animistically.
We have the second
law of thermodynamics,
the law of entropy,
which is the law that
says that everything in
the physical universe
tends to chaos.
Well, you don't need to be a
rocket scientist to know that.
That's why we carry day
planners, basically.
And the shaman describe
this force as Jaguar.
They call the Jaguar.
But then they
discovered that biology
followed a different path.
Biology did not tend to chaos.
It tended to
complexity, into beauty.
And you have cells that
team up with each other
to become tissues, that become
organs, that become eagles.
So they called that
jaguar as well.
So the shaman is able to go
mother sister jaguar, come
to me.
Teach me your ways.
And that organizing principle
of the universe, of jaguar,
will respond.
Whereas we can't go,
entropy, come to me,
because we have a non--
>> We think nature is dead.
>> Oh, yeah.
It is, yes.
The spirit has left nature.
We talk about our
father who is not here
instead of the great spirit
that permeates all things.
So when you're
dealing, for example,
with a runaway cancer
that is chaos spreading
through the body,
you're able to call
on this organizing principle
to bring harmony out of chaos.
Or you're looking at the
renewal of a marriage
or the renewal of
a city that needs
to reconnect with this
organizing principle of nature
that's available to us all,
except we are still convinced
that we live on the other
side of the wall of the garden
of Eden.
>> Well, what you had to do
when you went through many
initiations, one of them
was to let go of your past.
>> Correct, all of it at once.
And that's the medicine way.
You shed the past
the way the serpent
sheds her skin, which means
that it no longer informs you.
It no longer
hijacks the present,
because the Western notion,
one of the problems with it
is that it breeds
psychotherapists.
Instead, it says
who we are today
is a result of who
we were when we
were 10 and this violent
trauma that happened to us.
That is true.
But who we are today can also be
informed by who we're becoming,
not only by who we have been.
And that has to do with
stepping outside of time.
You can only access
that which you
are becoming by stepping
out of linear time
and shedding the
past all at once.
>> Rather than
rehashing the past.
>> Rather than the tremendous
suffering that we experience
in the West, because that's
what the Buddha taught us,
of course, is that we
all experience pain,
but suffering is a choice.
Suffering is dwelling
on what happened
and dwelling on how terrible it
might be when it happens again.
So you shed it all at
once as an act of love
and an act of power.
And you engage the Earth in
your own healing processes,
engage the mother
that has never left us
and that will never leave
us, and the mother that
wants us to be well.
Engage her and have her
assist us in our own healing.
>> And this has been
done through ritual.
>> It's been done through a
set of practices and techniques
that have been remembered and
transmitted through ritual.
Ritual has become the
vehicle for transmitting
this information.
This has become the vehicle.
But when you strip the ritual
of its cultural frills,
what you have is a methodology
of human transformation
based on the recognition
of a luminous envelope that
surrounds the physical body.
>> Now let's talk
about that some more.
When you first understood that
Antonio Morales, your teacher,
was a great shaman
was at the occasion
in which he was ministering
to the death of a missionary,
as I recall.
>> That's correct.
In an Indian village
high in the Andes.
A missionary had died.
She was very jaundiced.
And that was the
first time that I
saw he was not only the
professor but the medicine man
that I had been looking for.
And what he did is
that he assisted her
in separating her luminous
body from her physical one,
and in handing her
over like a mother
hands a baby over
to a grandmother,
turning her over
to the spirit world
so that she could make her
journey back home consciously.
But I saw this.
He awakened my
seeing, my sensing.
And I was able to perceive
this luminous form
departing the physical.
And the place changed from
an Indian hut with mud floors
into a cathedral.
The feel of the place became
the feel of a cathedral.
>> Something sacred
was taking place.
>> There was a sacredness.
There were angels in this room.
She was making her
journey back home, back
to her spiritual home,
back to our spiritual home.
>> And you were seeing something
luminous with your physical
eyes?
>> No.
I was sensing them
with my entire body.
But the images were
being created, of course,
in the same part
of the brain that
creates images for the
physical eye, which
is in the visual cortex--
>> This is very key--
>> --in the back of the brain.
>> --to understanding
this phenomenology.
>> Yes, because you know seeing
doesn't happen out there.
>> A camera would not probably
have been able to photograph
what you experienced.
>> Of course not, because
it's not within the visible
spectrum.
>> But in the presence of
Antonio Morales and another--
in the presence of other
shamans with whom you worked,
this visionary capacity
seemed to be more accessible.
>> Oh, it's awakened,
because they hold a field,
a space in which my notions of
what is real and what is not
are not as viable.
They are peeled away.
And also, within this
field, they were--
I was able to have
multi-modal perception,
multi-sensory perception.
I was able to taste,
smell, see, hear spirit.
And of course, we
have references
to this throughout
the Western literature
and mystical literature.
If you read St. Teresa,
St. John of the Cross,
if you speak to the
Tibetans, there's
constant references
to this light
that we confuse in the
West for an internal state.
We think that enlightenment
is only something that
happens inside your brain,
that when Christ said,
I am the way to the
light and that I
am the light, that
he was referring
to some kind of metaphor.
And when the Buddhists speak
about the way of enlightenment,
that that's just a
metaphor for something
that happens internally.
Of course, that's our
Western translation.
But throughout the primary
cultures of the world,
this is a literal
experience of the light
that continues beyond death.
>> Now, many people might think,
after having been awakened like
this, that you had arrived.
But for you, it wasn't
an arrival at all.
It was just the
beginning of what became
a very lengthy course of study.
>> It shattered my
conceptions of reality.
I had a fresh
doctorate under my arm.
And I thought that I--
>> Knew something.
>> --knew something.
And it deconstructed
my worldview,
including my notions
of time and space.
Then I had to begin-- that's
when I began my training.
I recognized that my doctoral
work had been a prelude to,
and that this was the real work,
the work that I could truly
make a contribution with.
And I think that one of
the greatest contributions
of the shamans'
body of knowledge
is the journey beyond death,
the death rights where
we can assist a loved one in
making this journey back home
so that we're not
lost and we're not
caught in the space between
the worlds in the nightmare
that we can't wake up from.
>> Well, you begin your book,
"Dance of the Four Winds,"
which you wrote back in
about 1990 as I recall,
describing how you were drawn
to go to Peru to take drug
ayahuasca because it was known
to be a drug that brought one
to the experience of death.
>> Correct.
Correct.
And it does, of course,
and it did with me.
And I found out
that it was not only
a drug that did it, that it was
really your purity of intent
and your love that allowed
you to travel beyond death.
The drug just put it right
in your face, which is--
and it's absolutely
unnecessary for this journey.
Now, this is one of
the core experiences
of the shaman in
her training, is
to master the ways beyond
death, now while we still
have a body to come back to.
Because when our final journey
comes at the end of our lives,
that's not a good time to
be asking for directions.
>> And it seems as if so much
of Western culture is motivated
by the fear of death.
>> Yes.
And what the shaman has is
an experience of infinity,
experience of infinity, of a
self that cannot be subject
to death.
And that realization is
the most healing experience
that we can have, to know that
we're free of the grip of time,
of the grip of death,
and the grip of disease.
>> Well, this is fundamental to
the understanding of the path
of the Inca medicine wheel.
And Alberto, I want to thank
you for sharing it with us.
You've covered in this short
interview so many things,
from the anthropological
perspective--
>> Well, I cover 20
years of my training.
But this is my intent now,
is to bring it to the West,
to take the shamanic out of
the rattle shaking and feather
waving and into the practical.
>> Alberto Villoldo, thank
you so much for being with me.
>> Thank you, Jeff.
>> It's been a pleasure.
And thank you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]